File Name: PITFALL.PRO     Last Update: 12/01/93     By: Kevin La Fleur

     JORNADA LTER II: Protocol for Arthropod-Lizard Pitfalls
                   Written by David Lightfoot

            
     I. INTRODUCTION.  In conjunction with net primary production 
studies, consumer and faunal studies are conducted at or near NPP 
sites using pitfall traps.  We use live traps, not employing 
ethylene glycol or other killing/preservative agents, with traps 
checked once a week at the minimum.  Sampling-with-replacement is 
used with the lizards but without replacement for the arthropods; 
thus any released arthropods, when possible, should not be let go 
in the immediate vicinity of the pitfall grids.

     Lizard-arthropod pitfall studies are conducted quarterly
over a period of two weeks: in February-March (following winter 
NPP), in  May-June (following spring NPP), in August, and in 
October-November (following fall NPP).  
          
     A.   LOCATION:   Pitfall grids consist of sixteen stations 
(four rows of four traps) located at the following ll sites (the 
old code, no longer used, is given in parentheses following each 
site*): T-WEST (TBA), T-EAST (TBB), M-RABB-A (MDA), M-RABB-C 
(MDC), M-WELL (MDB), G-IBPE-A (GLA), G-IBPE-C (GLC), G-BASN 
(GLB), C-SAND-B (CBB), C-CALI (CBA), and C-GRAV (CBD).  Pitfalls 
formerly located at MB (mixed basin slope NE of weather trailer) 
and C-SAND-C (CBC) have been closed.  No pitfalls are directly 
associated with the following NPP sites: P-COLL, P-SMAL, P-TOBO 
(because of flooding potential), T-TAYL, or G-SUMM.  The pitfall 
for C-SAND is located NW of the NPP site (see site map).  The 
location of each trap is marked by a rebar bearing a numbered 
aluminum tag.
* (old codes may still be found in data books and vial labels)

     B.   CONSTRUCTION: The LTER pitfall traps are walled by two        
large vegetable cans, 6" diameter; size 10 tomato cans (6 lbs, 3 
oz, ca. 6 l/2" high) are most common. The ends of the cans are 
cut out and the cans stacked so that the top of the upper can is 
nearly flush with the ground. Similar-sized coffee cans may be 
used; the  funnel (see below) should fit the can with little 
excess space.  The collection container is a slightly tapered 
plastic beverage  cup 5 l/2" deep with top diameter of 4  l/2"; 
several small (ca. l/16") holes are drilled in the bottom of each 
cup to  facilitate drainage.  A polypropylene funnel with top 
diameter of 5 l/2" is placed in the cup to seal the trap and 
prevent  escapes; the stem and lower funnel are cut off about 4" 
below the top, making a lower hole of ca. l l/2- 1 3/4" diameter.  
The cups are supported on small stones or wooden blocks to raise 
the top of the funnel nearer the top of the can (it should not be 
flush);  elevation of cups is especially important in  poorly 
drained sites. When not in use, the traps are sealed by a ceramic 
tile with dirt packed along sides (see procedure below).
     Trap numbers (l-16) originally were stamped on a small 
aluminum block fastened to a rebar next to each pit.  Many of
these blocks are now missing.  More recently, sites have been
numbered with aluminum tags attached to the rebar.  If both the
block and tag  are missing, the number can be determined by 
counting from the northeast corner of the grid (l-4 north-south, 
5-8  next line south-north, etc.).  However, some sites, notably 
BASN, have a different numbering scheme so always check adjacent 
trap numbers if unsure.

     A SITE MAP IS INCLUDED WITH THIS PROTOCOL

     II.  PROCEDURE:  Traps are usually opened on a Friday; 
the tiles are excavated and propped open l to 2" at one end using 
wooden blocks  or stones.  Be sure the tile covers the trap as 
completely as possible.  During spring and  summer, collections 
are made the Tuesday and Friday the week after opening and again 
Tuesday and Friday (close) of the next week.  In fall and winter, 
collections on Fridays are sufficient.  Take care to look under 
the cup; both lizards and arthropods (especially scorpions and 
crickets) will readily hide there.  Any  lizards found are 
carefully  grasped (don't grab tail!) and subjected to the 
measurements detailed in section A below.  Be sure to use forceps
on venemous arthropods.  Note special procedures for juvenile
lizards.  Before leaving for the field, make certain that you have 
the bag with measuring equipment (below) and a box with labelled 
cups (w/lids) for the eleven pitfall sites plus an additional 
unlabelled cup for each participant.  The data book should be on 
a clipboard which has a list of lizard species codes and 
identification information affixed.  IMPORTANT: the clipboard 
should also have an updated list of the identification numbers
previously used in toe marking. 
     A.  LIZARDS:  Equipment for processing lizards includes a 
metric ruler, scales, forceps, plastic bags, scissors, pencils, 
and a reptile  field guide. The scale is a PESOLA (l00  gram) 
spring-type; it is expensive so should be kept out of the dirt. 
Equipment kept in a zippered bag either in FH 117 or 236.  The 
following information is recorded in the Jornada LTER II Lizard 
Pitfall data book for each lizard:

       l.  Pit number (see above).

       2.  Species code:  Lizard species are recorded using a four 
           letter  code  (first  two letters  of  generic  and 
           species names).  Cnemidiphorus tigris is thus CNTI, etc.
  
       3.  Sex: record an M, F, or J (juvenile) for each lizard.
           The  field guide and clipboard information may  assist in 
           sexing, which differs in different families.

       4.  Rec.: If individuals have been previously toe marked, 
           record an R (recapture).  Record an N for unmarked adults.
       5.  Toe  mark: For newly captured adults, toes are clipped 
           according to the numbering system shown on each page of the 
           data book.  Note that the ventral side of the lizard is 
           shown in the diagram.  With scissors, clip the first 2 
           mm or so of the required toes.  As lizards have only 
           five toes, numbers 6-9 are not used in the codes.  
           Upon reaching number "6" one should skip to the next 
           availble combination (e.g. HOMA "2046" would skip to
           2050; UTST "56" would skip to 100.  Close attention
           should be given to avoid toe clipping errors.
           It is also imperative that accurate and updated records 
           be kept (on provided clipboard sheet) of numbers used; be 
           sure this sheet is brought to the field each time.  Severe 
           problems have occurred in the past with skipped and duplicated 
           numbers. In general, JUVENILES, especially small ones, should 
           not be toe clipped as the required handling may injure them.  
           Put a dash across the "toe mark" space for small juveniles.

       6.  S-V: record length (in mm) from snout apex to vent for each 
           lizard.  Exercise great care in handling juveniles for any   
           measurements.  Estimates might be better for very small 
           juveniles; the handling needed to position the lizard for 
           measurement may be injurious.  If the juvenile is not 
           too active it can be measured in the cup.

       7.  Total length: record total length in mm from snout to tail
           tip for each lizard.  

       8.  Weight: place lizard in plastic bag and clip bag to the
           scale.  Keeping bag out of wind if possible, note weight in 
           grams (subtract bag weight) and record in data book.  Very 
           small to small juveniles can be estimated at l gram.
 
       9.  Tail: record as whole (W) or broken (B).  If tail is 
           broken and regrown, record as broken and make a note at the
           bottom of the page.

         A SAMPLE LIZARD DATA BOOK PAGE IS INCLUDED WITH THIS PROTOCOL

     B. ARTHROPODS: Only selected arthropod groups are presently 
censused in the pitfall studies, with emphasis on terrestrial scavengers,
detritivores, granivores, and arachnid predators.  In general, the 
following groups are excluded from the analyses: aerial insects (bees, 
wasps [except Mutillidae], adult Neuroptera, Lepidoptera), aquatic 
groups, foliage feeding insects (grasshoppers, walking sticks, most 
Hemiptera and Homoptera, larvae), nesting spiders, (Latrodectus,
Filistatidae, Pholcidae, and mites and ticks (except red velvet 
mite).

     The following groups are emphasized:     
         Thysanura
         Microcoryphia            
         Orthoptera: camel crickets, field crickets, scaly crickets,
                     sand roaches
         Hemiptera: Reduviidae, Lygaeidae, Cydnidae, 
         Thyreocoridae, Alydidae, Pentatomidae
         Neuroptera: ant lion larvae
         Coleoptera: Carabidae (+Cicindelidae), Scarabaeidae,
                     Curculionidae, Phengodidae, Lycidae, 
                     Elateridae, Silphidae, Meloidae, Histeridae,
                     Cerambycidae, Ptinidae, Tenebrionidae
         Scorpions
         Whip scorpions
         Millipedes
         Centipedes
         Red velvet mites
         Spiders: Lycosidae, Gnaphosidae, Salticidae, Oxyopidae, 
                  Clubionidae, Ctenidae, Loxoscelidae, 
                  Theraphosidae

      1. Releases: The following can be recorded and released
         (unlike for lizards, pitfall number is not required):
         tarantulas, whip scorpions, large Lycosa (T-WEST),  
         Dasymutilla klugii  males or females.  It is hoped that
         in the future most tenebrionids, carabids, and all large 
         arachnids can be identified and released in the field.  
         Note any releases in the comments section at the bottom
         of page in data book.  Insects brought back to the field
         from the lab and released can be noted on a slip of
         paper (use pencil or india ink) for alcohol vials.  This
         note explains discrepancies in the counts between data
         books and actual specimens in vials.  ANY TIME ARTHROPODS
         ARE RELEASED, LOST, SENT ELSEWHERE, OR PLACED IN VOUCHER              
         COLLECTION, A NOTE SHOULD BE PLACED IN VIAL.
             Where possible, release arthropods near but not on
         the pitfall grid where they were captured.  Releases a
         great distance away and in a different habitat are to be 
         discouraged; future studies of arthropod distribution 
         and habitat preferences may be adversely affected.

      2. COLLECTIONS:  Insects captured in the pitfalls are 
         transferred to plastic cups (with lids) of the same 
         type used in the traps.  Each person running the 
         pitfalls needs a cup; one of the cups should have the
         site labelled on the lid.  Following collections at 
         each site, consolidate the samples in the labelled cup.
         Avoid if possible excess dirt, sand, or vegetation in 
         the samples- these make processing more difficult.   
         The cups are transported to and from the field in a 
         large cardboard box, preferably one that will hold the 
         cups upright.  During warm weather try to keep the 
         samples out of direct sunlight.  Store the samples in 
         the walk-in refrigerator in FH 303.  Label the box with
         project name and name and phone # of persons to be 
         contacted in case of problems.

      3. PROCESSING: Ideally, processing of arthropod samples 
         should be done within about two weeks of collection to 
         avoid dried and deteriorated samples, although some 
         groups (e.g. tenebrionids) can live for long periods.  
         To minimize fungal problems, samples that have gotten
         wet should be processed as soon as possible.  Live
         insects, especially smaller ones, are much easier to 
         find; "undersampling" will thus be reduced.
              To separate arthropods, we presently place the 
         samples on two stacked round sieves (Tyler or U.S. Std. 
         type) over a white metal tray.  Sieve mesh sizes of 0.ll0 
         in. (2.794 mm; #7 U.S. Std.) (top) and 0.0394 in. (1.0 mm;
         # 18 U.S. Std.) (bottom) seem to work well. The larger
         insects may be picked directly out of the top sieve
         and the sample then sifted over the tray to separate/           
         detect the smaller forms.  As a final step, spread the           
         entire sample (with as little debris as possible) on the 
         tray and carefully search for remaining small arthropods.  
         Very small samples may be placed directly on the tray 
         without using sieves.  Use of forceps is recommended-
         there may be a number of venemous arthropods in the
         sample!   After processing of a site is finished,
         remaining material may be placed in a box and discarded
         (soil may be poured in flower beds outside of bldg.).
               Separated organisms are placed in 70-80% ETOH in 
         glass vials (3 l/4" tall, l l/4" diameter black plastic  
         screw cap with liner).  Use more than one vial if 
         necessary to avoid overcrowding samples.  In samples 
         with many large insects the alcohol should be drained 
         and replaced in 2-3 months.  Label each vial with site 
         and date using a white stick-on label on lid.  As an
         additional safety factor, also put a site/date label
         inside the vial, using one of the preprinted labels
         with date written in insoluble (India) ink.  Place
         the samples together by date on the shelf in FH-236C.
              a. Any arthropods from the site that have been or
                 will be released should be so noted on a piece
                 of paper in the vial (see above).
              b. Samples that have been long in storage and 
                 those with much soil and vegetation should be 
                 searched carefully several times.  Small 
                 insects and spiders often appear after repeated 
                 searches.  
              c. Use of optical aids (microscope, magnifying 
                 glass) is not recommended; none has been used 
                 in the past and no very small microarthropods
                 (Collembola, Diplura, etc.) are currently 
                 being counted.  Good lighting is important.
              d. Don't try to search too much material at once. 
                 Samples with considerable soil may have to be
                 processed in two or more lots.
              e. Take great care not to confuse samples: don't have 
                 more than one vial open at once, and don't put
                 a vial where it can be opened by mistake.  Where 
                 two sites have the same name but different letter
                 (TARBUSH, RABB, etc.) be especially careful not to 
                 mix them up.

      4. IDENTIFICATION: samples in glass vials may be poured 
         into a glass dish (large petri dishes work well).  A
         microscope will be necessary for smaller species.
         Identifications and counts are recorded in the Jornada 
         LTER II Arthropod Data Book.  Each species (identified 
         as far as possible) is given a unique 8-letter 
         identification code, consisting of the first two 
         letters of the order, family, genus, and species names.
         For example, the tenebrionid beetle Eleodes gracilis 
         is coded COTEELGR.  In case of duplicate codes, change 
         one species name (perhaps using first and third 
         letters) and use this code consistently from then on.
         Alter family names within an order in a similar manner.
               In event of partial identifications, code as 
         follows:  identify and code the species to the lowest 
         category possible.  When an unknown level is reached,
         use numbers (0l, 02, l0, etc.) instead of letters to
         code for that and all following categories.
             Examples:
                 If one has an unknown genus (and species) of 
         carabid beetle, the code for the first such unknown is
         COCA0l01 (put lines through zeroes to distinguish from 
         the letter "O".  
                 The next carabid of unknown (but different) 
         genus will code COCA0201.
                 If you find another carabid which obviously 
         belongs in genus 01, it is coded COCA0102.
                 The first beetle identifiable only to order 
         will be coded with three numbers: CO010101.  The 25th 
         beetle that appears to be in an unknown (but distinct) 
         family will be CO250101.  The implication is that all 25 
         beetles are in different families, which may or may not 
         be true (but see below).
                 The second beetle that appears to be in the 2nd 
         (recognizable but un-named) family, but in a different
         genus, codes CO020201.  The next beetle of family 2 
         genus 2 but of an apparently different species would 
         code CO020202.
                 Use of the code system is a useful bookeeping 
         process which can preclude the need to immediately know 
         all arthropods to the species level in order to keep them 
         separate for counting purposes.  There will be an 
         amount of uncertainty in some cases but these are the
         minority and can be resolved through further 
         identification (see CURATION below).  If in doubt, give
         each specimen its own family, genus, and species number.
                Obviously, once a number code is used numbers should 
         continue in lower categories.  A code such as CO02CA01
         implies that while the genus is known, the family is 
         not, a rare situation (the family could be simply looked 
         up in a checklist or other reference).
                Keep an updated list of species codes on a special 
         form kept in a binder on the shelf in 236C.  Species 
         codes are listed by family for the large groups and by 
         order for the smaller ones.  The list allows one to note 
         at a glance which codes have been already used and 
         permits identification of unfamiliar codes quickly. 
         Correctly cite the author name for each species- the
         author is part of the scientific name.

      5. RECORDING DATA:
              a. Record the species codes and counts for each in 
                 the data book, listing any problems, 
                 provisional identifications, etc. at the 
                 bottom of the page.                     
              b. If the specimen is a larva, make a note
                 either to the right side of the line or
                 at bottom of page.
              c. If the specimen is rare or unique, note the
                 record at the bottom of the page.  This will
                 facilitate finding the record quickly.
              d. As of this writing (2/93) Orthoptera and 
                 Arachnida are not being identified to species
                 but are separated into labelled vials to be sent
                 to Dave Lightfoot (UNM) (Orthop.) and Dave 
                 Richman (NMSU) (Arach.) for inspection.
                 Addresses: Lightfoot- Dept. Biology, UNM,
                 Albuquerque, NM 87131, l-277-8949.  Richman-
                 Box 3BE, Dept. Entomol. and Plant Path., 
                 NMSU, Las Cruces, NM 8800l, 646-3542.  
                 However, Orthoptera and Arachnids are being
                 counted, with identification to genus
                 possible for the Orthoptera.  
              e. Although precise identifications (even to
                 family) are not possible at present for
                 most spiders, scorpions, and sun spiders,
                 keep an official count of these groups in
                 the data book for purposes of the data set.
                 A few spiders (e.g. tarantulas) can be separated
                 but the genus/species names of our tarantula(s) 
                 are presently uncertain. 
              f. Unless the sample is extremely small, with few 
                 or no arachnids and Orthoptera, keep a separate
                 page for each site in the data book.  As these
                 two groups are identified, new names will be 
                 added to the page for each site.  It is anticipated
                 that should numerous arachnids be identified,
                 room in the present data books will be 
                 insufficient.  There are several new data books
                 available in the LTER office for use in cataloging
                 Arachnida in such an event.
              g. When finished with the sample, return the specimens 
                 to the proper vial and replace the alcohol.
              
        A SAMPLE ARTHROPOD DATA PAGE IS INCLUDED WITH THIS PROTOCOL
 
      6.  CURATION:  A synoptic collection of pinned voucher 
          specimens is being kept in FH 236C.  One or two 
          specimens of each unknown should be placed there.
          Camel crickets and Arachnida require alcohol 
          preservation and this collection is also in FH 236C.
          At present (2/93) the alcohol voucher collection
          is in its formative stages and is incomplete (largely
          because of lack of identfied material).
              a. For each new voucher specimen, put the 
                 identification code (pink card) and site/date label   
                 white card) on the pin.  ALWAYS LABEL SPECIMENS.
                 Pre-printed labels for the pitfall sites are now
                 available (in 236C).
              b. Store vouchers in unit trays in green cabinet,
                 grouping by order, family, etc.  Don't crowd 
                 specimens in unit trays as breakage will
                 result, and specimens will be difficult to
                 remove for identification.
              c. Any specimens not returned to the vial (for 
                 vouchers, sent to museums, etc.) must be noted on a 
                 slip of paper, which is placed in vial.  Avoid 
                 sending rare or unique specimens off as 
                 donations.  If specimens are later returned
                 to the vial, be sure to update the note
              d. Unknowns in any category should be sent to 
                 specialists (if one is available) for 
                 identification.  If possible, try not to send
                 uniques away but this cannot be avoided at 
                 times.  ALWAYS send labels pinned with the                    
                 specimen- label data may aid identifications.
                 Most dates, because of consolidation of
                 samples, will be month/year only, but 
                 collection dates (two or four dates) are
                 listed in lizard data book for reference.
              e. Shipping protocol for insect specimens:
                 Pin the specimens into a sturdy entomological        
                 shipping box (Mason box or Schmitt box) having a            
                 polyethylene foam bottom.  Place pins closely on 
                 the sides of large  specimens so they will not
                 come loose or swivel.  Place the box in a larger                              
                 mailing carton with plenty of foam packing to 
                 keep smaller box from jarring.  Put an 
                 additional shipping label inside the box
                 (preferably on the lid of the pinning container).
                      Conspicuously label the carton "fragile"
                 and be sure to send the recipient a separate
                 cover letter (never enclose this with specimens).
                      If the specimens are in alcohol, top off the
                 the vials to avoid air bubbles, tape the vial
                 lids, and carefully pack in a separate box
                 with cotton. 
                      If you can supply additional geographic and 
                 ecological data, identifications may be 
                 facilitated. Attempt to send the specialist 
                 several examples of each unknown, if such are 
                 available and can be recognized.  Sometimes what 
                 is sent as one species may be several species (or 
                 genera!). The identifier is welcome to duplicates 
                 (perhaps additional duplicates can be sent) but 
                 again try to avoid losing unique voucher 
                 specimens. In some groups (such as small 
                 tenebrionidae) even identified  material may not 
                 be of much help in identifying similar specimens.  
                 For the analyses these may have to be lumped.
              f. Eventually, the voucher collection should be 
                 labelled with the pre-printed labels.  The
                 collection should then be placed in or donated to  
                 an entomological museum (probably the Entomology 
                 Dept. at NMSU).

  III.  CLOSING PITFALLS: on the last day of collections, close
        the pitfalls by lowering the tiles to the ground 
        surface and covering the pitfall as well as possible, and 
        then packing soil or sand tightly around the edges and
        top of the tile.  Soil on top may discourage coyotes and 
        help assure tight closure.  A shovel or trowel is useful 
        in closing the traps.  Be sure to place a stone atop the  
        tile or it may be difficult to find the trap again.
        Sloppily closed pitfalls will be deathtraps for any 
        organisms getting in, so take time to seal them.

  IV.   GENERAL PROBLEMS
             l. Poor drainage (or flooding) is a problem in
                several areas, especially tarbush and BASN. 
                If traps and cups are flooded, pour the cup 
                onto a flat surface and try to recover as many 
                organisms as possible (note in book any not 
                kept).  Using the cup, bail as much water out of
                the trap as possible.
             2. Broken tiles: this has been a problem at the 
                RABB sites which are open to grazing.  Tiles
                from the LTER I transect have been used as 
                replacements.  An extra tile is usually kept with
                the pitfall box and a box of tiles has
                been kept in the annex.
             3. Broken funnels: plastic funnels eventually
                begin to crack and must be replaced.  If broken
                funnels are noticed make a note for immediate     
                replacement.  Some funnels are available in the
                FH236 lab.
             4. Natural toe loss in lizards may affect the toe 
                marking system.  If new captures have lost toes
                (usually only one foot will be affected), try
                to incorporate the digit into the marking scheme.
                Toe losses in marked recaptures may be told by 
                reference to the marking lists and should be 
                noted in the data book.
             5. Escapees: large, active lizards are easily
                capable of escaping from one's grip and 
                occasionally from untended traps with the tile
                off.  Beware of lizards running up your arm as
                you attempt to pull them from traps- a quick grab
                is safer than "slow fishing."  If a lizard 
                escapes, note as much information as you can 
                about it and then write "escaped" across the rest 
                of the row.
